---
title: 'Musing: Digital Handwriting vs Pencil & Paper for Notes, Brainstorming, and
  Planning'
layout: post
date: '2019-08-20 23:03:04'
tags: musings
---

By midday today, I found myself in a negative and unproductive mood. I had gone on a run in the morning and then made a nice salad for lunch, but spent the afternoon frustratingly failing to watch a movie over video call with a friend and then lying around talking without engagement or fulfillment. But I had a lot to get done, my sense of purpose strong from wasting a lot of the previous two days playing videogames (days spent with friends seem to slip by without leaving a mark — my personal world and quality time with others worlds seem to be separate: I can see each from the other, but not be in both at once) and then having a conversation and doing some reflection that made me determined to get back on track.

So I made an effort to kick myself back into gear. I left home and got on a bus to Columbia’s campus. There were several difficult things I wanted to work on, and previously I had built up the willpower to do them, but now they had drained. So instead, I determined the only objective I would set for myself would be to list out all the things I needed to do now, during the summer, and going forward in the fall. And from there, I would plan my immediate next steps for the day and no more. (Interesting idea from book on working conditions about planning only for next few weeks and avoiding long term multi-year company plans that just waste effort.)

I thought of how I often ran out of space or just felt restricted when writing such lists in my beloved Muji notebook. 80% of the time, paper and pencil were awesome and served my purposes super well. It was far better than writing lists using computer software like Dynalist (although I use this extensively for things like building longer and more coherent outlines), as it gave me freedom in form: I could space things out however I wanted, create my own hierarchies and information structures with no effort at all. But oftentimes I desired even more freedom: if only I could just take these notes and drag them somewhere else on the page, or if the page extended infinitely but could still be navigated through as quickly as looking or flipping through.

This is exactly the kind of freedom that digital handwritten notetaking provides. With my Surface Laptop and Pen and OneNote open, I could do exactly the same thing I did on paper, but to a whole new level, at a whole new speed and efficiency. No more erasing, no more starting over and having to think through how I wanted to structure things and where physically to start writing before I did. I could simply jot all my thoughts down, then circle some text, drag it somewhere else, really quickly restructure the whole document. Or, using the awesome ‘add space on page tool’, as long as the notes still maintain good vertical organization (mine do as they’re still very much modeled off of pencil-and-paper format; following tradition does optimize for readability oftentimes) I can really easily just create an empty space inbetween notes and fill in something that makes more sense there. It’s awesome. My mind map started, then entirely restructured and changed purpose but with reusing previous writing rather than roughly erasing it. It expanded, became more detailed then more simplified, allowing my thoughts to take shape and blossom on the page.

If digital notes are so good, why do I still carry around multiple pencil-and-paper notebooks dedicated for planning and brainstorming on me at all times? Once, I did use almost exclusively digital notes. For all my classes, all my projects, I would do all my recording and planning on my Surface Laptop. And it was awesome. I could flip through the year’s worth of notes instantly, all right there on my computer and on my phone and in the cloud if I needed to access it there. While writing, I could quickly restructure and move things around, draw diagrams and formulas and equations without worrying about spacing.

But it does have a few drawbacks. Each of these, I think, are fairly small and able to be ignored. However, added together, they made paper a better overall solution in some cases, and as I was carrying around paper notebooks anyways they gradually took over my life once again. Some of these drawbacks:

- Ease of use and handwriting. Stylus technology has gotten insanely good, especially on a laptop not even designed to be used as a tablet or with a stylus like this. But there’s still just that bit of lag, that different feel that turns my “not lovely but okay” handwriting to “awful and just barely legible”. I attribute part of this to me having a Surface Laptop. I turn it on its side when writing, and the screen distorts in ways that the Surface Pro and Book don’t. I believe the screen hardware or drivers or whatever just aren’t up to par with other Surface devices and things like the iPad Pro, which in my limited experience feel super smooth to the point of being at least as easy to write on as paper, if different and taking a bit of getting used to.
- Getting distracted by a laptop being open. Class gets boring sometimes. When I have a laptop right there, it’s really easy to open a website and fill my time with something more stimulating, or even start scrolling through the endless other notes at my disposal and just losing attention. It’s a source of infinite information and distraction at my fingertips, and while it isn’t a super frequent problem and one I could work around with effort, it’s far easier when it’s just a paper notebook. Even though some of the same opportunities exist — I can look through earlier notes, start doodling, whatever — the amount of stuff in the notebook and what I can do with it is a lot more contained and harder to access, not designed to suck my attention away.
- Having a separate, physical notebook is often really nice. If I need to reference my textbook or problems on my laptop, I don’t need to be switching windows all the time. Or, when traveling or in a lab or wherever, being able to prop open or pass around a notebook without worrying about people accidentally clicking into something else or something getting messed up as with a digital device can be handy.

On further reflection, though, all three of these problems are solvable. Of course sometimes there may just be hard rules against electronics use or it may be too expensive or inaccessible for whatever other reason, and it may not make sense in your life or notetaking or computer use case overall to spend money and effort changing your ways to solve these problems. But there may be a solution that’s just good enough to once again outweigh its drawbacks and push me back over to digital notetaking.

Consider this: a dedicated, well-optimized device for notetaking, separate from your laptop or general purpose computer. This is what my friend does: she uses an iPad Pro for notetaking in addition to having a laptop. The first problem goes away just with better technology, and if the iPad Pro isn’t good enough one day something surely will be. The second problem is much mitigated by having an iPad much more limited in functionality and especially multitasking and ability to get casually distracted, as when the notetaking app is open it’s just a static notebook. The third problem is most directly addressed — the iPad takes on many of the best qualities of a notebook form factor, being separate from your laptop and easy to use on the go.

I believe, at least while I’m in my fast-paced, much-moving-around school life, that my small little paper planner will still be irreplaceable. It’s a level of reliability and convenience that digital will never replace. But perhaps my bigger brainstorming/planning notebook and the composition notebooks I use for classes would disappear if I got my hands on an iPad Pro or even a Surface Book or something more suitable for digital notetaking. At the end of the day, digital notetaking has so many crazy advantages that make working with it so much easier than with pencil and paper for free-form (really free-form) writing. I hope to be make use of more and many others are doing the same as the technology becomes better and more accessible.