---
title: Summer Reading
---

One thing I’ve rediscovered the magic of is reading. I’ve read a few really impactful books this summer. One I think I mentioned is Harvard Business Review’s collection of articles titled “On Managing Yourself,” which I impulse bought for my flight to China. I had never thought about management theory at all, and the book blew my mind at times when I realized how applicable and powerful it could be (after being immersed in the management disaster that is The Phillipian for a year…). In a bookstore one afternoon I became captivated by a self-improvement book called “The Subtle Art of Not Giving a Fuck” by Mike Manson. I didn’t expect much of it at first, but it was on multiple bestsellers and highly reviewed shelves, so I took a look. Past the first twenty or so pages of exactly as much profanity as expected, the writing turned thorough and super insightful, combining studies, hypotheticals, and personal anecdotes to make clear and compelling explanations and guidance. Most of it was very practical, talking about finding fulfillment, setting life goals, and handling relationships, but the last chapter dived way in to tie everything together, putting everything in the frame of death. Manson loses the unnecessary profanity and irreverent humor, instead weaving together stories of a close friends’ death, his own suicide attempt, anthropologist Ernest Becker’s “Denial of Death,” and subtle callbacks to the rest of his book to really string his whole book together and make a profound point. Found in one of the most unexpected places, I think it’s one of the most beautiful passages I’ve read recently.

Another really cool book has been Paul Kalanithi’s When Breath Becomes Air. Kalanithi was a neurosurgeon who died of lung cancer right at the end of his residency, and this is the memoir he wrote about his life and career before he died. His thoughts and career are fascinating and mind-blowingly purposeful and impressive: majoring in English seeking understanding about life, pursuing medicine so he could face it firsthand, finding his calling in taking responsibility for patients and providing guidance and comfort in the face of death, before finding himself on his deathbed just as his decades of hard work were about to pay off. This is a book that many of my friends have read, and just about every one of them are on pre-med tracks or planning on it. For a while after reading it, it seemed to me like there wasn’t any other career or life worth living. The closest thing I could think of was when I read about Apollo astronauts, similarly dedicating and risking their lives and going through hellish conditions with such an incredible expertise and unshakeable sense of purpose and duty. But then, was it really such a meaningful purpose? Patriotism and space exploration seemed to pale in the face of directly saving and changing lives. As much respect and admiration I have for doctors now, I don’t think I would do well or be happy pursuing medicine (Manson’s key idea — choose and love your struggle, not your end destination). Instead the book has showed me what it means to find a purpose in life, and I’ll be looking for inspiration from more incredible books and people to try and find mine.

I read a totally different kind of book in Liu Cixin’s Three Body trilogy, an incredibly acclaimed and widely-read Chinese hard sci-fi series (two books translated by Ken Liu, himself an incredible author). With one exception in the second book, the characters and plotlines are generally not very well written or structured, but the ideas are incredible, expanding in scope and imagination every time you think the limit has been reached, yet all grounded in rigorous but the most pioneering areas of physics. It starts in the Chinese Cultural Revolution and warps into an alien conquest story, before generalizing to all life in the universe and giving a solution to the Fermi paradox, then expanding to the scale of the universe and its life and death, and even beyond that to twelve dimensions of string theory, magically weaving them all into neat patterns that are clear to understand, immersive, and utterly mind-blowing.

Most recently, a book that caught my eye in Columbia’s bookstore was The Confidence Code: The Science and Art of Self-Assurance — What Women Should Know. It discusses a “confidence gap” between men and women, analyzing the ways men and women tend to think differently about setbacks and life and the implications, exploring biological and social reasons, and then talking about how to use this knowledge, not only how to remedy it but to take advantage of differences and change things for the future. It caught my attention because it was something I had seen and heard a lot from girls around me, their frustrations about expectations for them and double standards for basic self-advocacy and professional behavior. It’s written by two journalists, and I loved the style of writing, the journalists discovering all the different components of their argument through interviews of top female athletes and business executives, psychologists, sociologists, and biologists on the cutting edge of thorough, clinical research on the topic, and their own anecdotes and practical applications all woven in. It was a really fascinating, thorough, often infuriating, but in the end enlightening and somewhat encouraging read.