---
title: library stairwell
layout: post
date: '2020-02-13 10:14:24'
tags: moment
---

Searching for a study space with sight of the clear afternoon sun, Maxwell and I end up in the back stairwell of the library. Tucked between the furthest back study rooms, the stairwell is rarely trafficked, its solid marble steps rising through the square cutout that rises up and down through the building. On the top floor, a window to the left, slightly offset, lets in beams of sunlight that travel to the wall we are sitting against, forming a glowing pattern. When clouds pass over the sun, the light turns to a pale glow, drowned out by the warm-pink artificial light overhead. We sit on the hard marble floor, our backpacks to our sides, me with my laptop on my legs crossed and out straight, Maxwell with a small book of Shakespeare between his tucked legs, quietly and steadily filling it with underlines and annotations.

Sounds echo around the stairwell boomingly but as if from far away, as if it were a massive, cavernous space. A press of a key on my laptop return like echos of a gunshot. Drum hits in the music we play expand beyond the unseen speakers of my laptop and reverberate through the room as if designed that way. When we speak, our words go out, bounce back, overlap and multiply, and it feels as if the still air is being filled up and oversaturated with volume so that we must choose our words carefully and not say too many to prevent it from spilling over. The echoing and the marble evoke the feeling of being in a massive, stark, empty marble temple or palace, a great dim, colorless hall with columns going down each side.

The glowing rectangle of light, softly wavering and textured by the trees and leaves, have shadows cast on them: straight, regular ones from muttons on the windows and irregular, moving ones from me and Maxwell. As the harsh afternoon light lands on my face, it fills me up with nostalgia. It reminds me of winter afternoons after school, walking into my snowy backyard after getting off the school bus instead of going inside, taking in the golden air, the pristine landscape, the sharp, (clean? refreshing? pure?) cold of the winter air. Of finally being alone after a long day at school and with friends in the city, or at least anonymous; walking home through Morningside Park, on broad Cathedral Parkway with its somehow calm consistent flow of traffic and people, the spread-out businesses, old five-story brownstones, ten-story brick apartment buildings, modern glass and concrete high-rises that line it, and when I finally get home the constantly flowing (but to me familiar, lazy, and comforting) traffic circle weaving a little loop at the corner between my apartment building, the Upper West Side, Harlem, and Central Park.

*Originally written on November 3rd, 2019*